Overview
========

Hypertext is a way of organising and linking information that allows users to jump
between related topics or documents easily. Hypertext lets users explore information in
a more flexible, non-linear way by following links. These links, known as hyperlinks,
can connect different pieces of information, making it easier to explore related ideas
across various documents or media.

Hypertext is a fundamental idea behind many digital systems and is used not just on the
web but in software, documentation, and multimedia projects. The key concept is that
information doesn’t need to be organised in a strict order; instead, it can be
interconnected, allowing users to follow their own paths through it.

History
-------

The idea of hypertext was first proposed in the 1960s by Ted Nelson, who envisioned a
world where information could be linked in a network of interconnected ideas. His vision
helped shape the future of digital information systems, but it wasn’t until the 1980s
that hypertext started becoming a reality in everyday use.

One early example of hypertext in action was Apple's HyperCard, released in 1987.
HyperCard allowed users to create "stacks" of virtual cards, with each card containing
text, images, or buttons that could link to other cards or stacks. This system was an
early form of hypertext that made it easier for people to create interactive, connected
information. HyperCard became a popular tool for education and multimedia projects and
was an important step in making hypertext accessible to more people.

Around the same time, another major development was taking place at CERN, a research
organisation in Switzerland. In 1989, Tim Berners-Lee, a British scientist working at
CERN, proposed a new system that used hypertext to share and organise information among
researchers. This system became the World Wide Web. By combining hypertext with the
emerging global network known as the Internet, Berners-Lee created a way to link
documents across different computers worldwide. He also developed the first web browser,
called WorldWideWeb, in 1990, which allowed users to view and navigate hypertext
documents.

The early web network was simple but powerful. It quickly grew as people began creating
websites and linking to one another, turning the web into a vast, interconnected system.
By the mid-1990s, the World Wide Web had exploded in popularity, revolutionizing how
people accessed and shared information.

Modern Usage
------------

Today, hypertext remains at the core of how we use the web. Hyperlinks, created using
HTML (HyperText Markup Language), connect billions of web pages, making it possible to
navigate the web effortlessly. But the web has evolved far beyond simple hypertext
links. Modern web technologies like CSS (for styling), JavaScript (for interactivity),
and frameworks like React and Angular have transformed web pages into dynamic
applications that can handle everything from streaming videos to online shopping.

The impact of these technologies on our daily lives is enormous. In education, hypertext
and web technologies have transformed learning, enabling students to access resources,
participate in online courses, and collaborate with peers across the globe. In work, the
web has made remote work, global collaboration, and instant communication possible.
Recreation has also been revolutionized, with streaming services, online gaming, and
social media becoming central parts of our lives.
