Big Data's Impact on the Web
============================

Big data has dramatically reshaped web architecture, introducing new
complexities and opportunities in how websites and web applications collect,
manage, and analyse vast amounts of information. Key aspects of this
transformation include data mining, metadata utilisation, and streaming data
management, each bringing innovative technologies and techniques that influence
modern web systems.

Big Data
--------

Big data refers to extremely large and complex datasets that traditional data
processing tools cannot efficiently manage. It is characterised by the "3 Vs":

- Volume: The enormous amount of data generated every second from various
  sources like social media, sensors, transactions, and more.
- Velocity: The speed at which new data is created and needs to be processed,
  often in real-time or near real-time.
- Variety: The diverse types of data—structured, semi-structured, and
  unstructured—that range from text and images to videos and sensor data.

These attributes necessitate advanced technologies and methodologies for
collection, storage, analysis, and management, fundamentally shaping modern web
architecture and decision-making processes.

Data Mining
-----------

Data mining involves extracting useful patterns, trends, and insights from
large datasets. In the context of web architecture, it means collecting user
behaviour data, transaction logs, and other digital footprints to inform
decision-making and improve services.

Modern web architectures handle data mining through distributed storage and
processing frameworks. Technologies like Apache Hadoop use the MapReduce
paradigm to process massive datasets across clusters of computers. Frameworks
such as Apache Spark provide in-memory processing capabilities for faster
analysis, making it feasible to sift through petabytes of data in real-time or
near real-time.

Metadata
--------

Metadata is data that describes other data. In web systems, it often
encompasses information about user interactions, file properties, or system
logs.

How Is Metadata Helpful?

- **Organisation and Retrieval**: Metadata helps structure large datasets,
  making it easier to search, retrieve, and manage information. For example,
  image metadata such as tags, descriptions, and creation dates assist in
  organising media libraries.
- **Data Context**: By providing context to raw data, metadata aids in
  understanding user behaviour, content relevance, and system performance. This
  additional layer can guide content recommendations and targeted advertising.
- **Improved Data Quality**: Metadata can track data lineage and
  transformations, ensuring accuracy and consistency throughout the data life
  cycle.

Streaming Data Management
-------------------------

Streaming data refers to continuous, rapid data flows generated by sources like
user clicks, sensor readings, or financial transactions. Handling this in web
architecture requires systems that can process data in motion rather than in
batches.

How Is Streaming Data Handled?

- **Message Brokers**: Technologies like Apache Kafka, RabbitMQ, and Amazon
  Kinesis act as intermediaries that collect, buffer, and distribute streams of
  data to various processing systems.
- **Real-Time Processing Frameworks**: Tools such as Apache Storm, Apache
  Flink, and Spark Streaming enable real-time analysis of data as it arrives.
  These frameworks process streams of data on-the-fly, allowing immediate
  insights and actions.
