Overview
====================

A web server is a computer system that delivers web pages and other resources 
to your browser when you request them. Whether you're checking social media, streaming 
videos, or shopping online, you're interacting with a web server through the Hypertext 
Transfer Protocol (HTTP). This foundational technology supports every website on the 
internet. HTTP servers have transformed commerce and society, affecting how we 
live, work, and interact with the world. Every time you browse the web, download an 
app, or use an online service, you're relying on the same basic HTTP technology that 
powers the entire internet.
    
History
--------------------

The first web server was created by Tim Berners-Lee in 1990 at CERN as part of his 
invention of the World Wide Web. This early server used a basic version of HTTP to 
deliver simple text documents. Over time, HTTP has evolved to handle more complex 
tasks, such as delivering multimedia content and securing data. HTTP/1.1, introduced 
in 1997, brought improvements like persistent connections, which allowed faster 
browsing. More recently, HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 have further increased efficiency and speed, 
making modern websites faster and more responsive. Technologies like WebSockets have 
also extended HTTP, enabling real-time communication for live chat, online gaming, and 
other interactive applications.

Alongside the evolution of HTTP, server-side scripting emerged in the 1990s, 
revolutionizing how web servers could deliver dynamic content. Early technologies like 
CGI (Common Gateway Interface) allowed servers to run scripts and generate web pages on 
the fly, rather than just serving static files. This led to the development of more 
advanced scripting languages like PHP, which became one of the most popular tools for 
building dynamic websites. PHP allowed developers to create web applications that could 
interact with databases, handle forms, and generate personalized content. Other 
server-side technologies like ASP.NET (from Microsoft) and Ruby on Rails have also 
played significant roles in making web applications more powerful and interactive.


Python
--------------------

Today, web servers are more versatile than ever, thanks to powerful programming 
languages like Python and frameworks like Flask. These allow developers to build 
dynamic websites and web applications that can handle complex tasks, such as processing 
payments, managing databases, and supporting user authentication. Modern web servers 
use WSGI (Web Server Gateway Interface) to bridge the gap between web applications and 
server software, making it easier to create and scale interactive web systems. This 
technology powers the websites and services we rely on daily, from social media and 
entertainment to education and commerce, playing a central role in the digital world we 
live in.

